Generic sports strategies are an excellent
tool and that is why we have put
so much focus, because it helps
very well to understand how the
different sources of competitive
advantage or the strategies
that a company has are.
However, if we take it in a very
strict way, there may be companies
that we don’t know where to
frame them and let’s see,
let’s see why.
We will look at the strategy
of cost leadership and you choose
cost leadership, what you
have to do is reduce costs throughout
your entire value chain
and your customers will
choose you by price.
Here is the example of Ryanair.
Ryanair customers choose Ryanair
by price and your customers will
be very unfaithful and almost
impossible that with a strategy
If we go to the differentiation
strategy is the opposite.
Your customers, like the case of the
OEB, choose you because there is something
in your proposal that they like
and also you usually get to
have some loyalty or fidelity
with customers.
But now I will put the case of several
companies such as Ikea, for example,
or Zara or Mercadona or Toyota
and we will reason if they
fit more within the strategy
of cost leadership or differentiation.
Because it is complex.
Mercadona, for example, is a company
that is a clear leader in cost
but yet there are hundreds of thousands
of customers who are absolutely
loyal to Mercadona who
do not choose Mercadona
for cost alone.
So it’s already complicating
us, we don’t know where to place
it and we would say the same with Ikea,
with Zara, with Toyota, either.
This is why a new strategy has
been created called Best Cost Strategy,
which is the best cost strategy
and we will analyze it with
the case of Ikea.
IKEA is the clear leader in
cost of its industry.
In addition, as it grew, it gained
an enormous market share
thanks to having very lower costs
than the rest of its competitors,
its enormous scale economy
and being able to impact
those cost savings on the
final product prices.
And there are many tests, it is very
very very efficient in terms of
all logistics, warehouses, etc.
And also, for example, another
example of their bet on cost
leadership is the fact that
you have to mount the furniture,
that it is not mounted.
The service level has been reduced
with the aim of reducing costs.
However, I think that Ikea,
from that huge economy of scale
and by making certain innovations
in its value proposal, has
managed to incorporate certain
factors or certain particularities
that fit more within
a differentiation strategy.
If we think about it, if we follow
the criterion of whether customers
choose Ikea only for cheap or there
are customers who also choose you for
some differential factor that they
like from Ikea, I think the
answer is yes.
There are customers, there are many customers
who buy Ikea not just because it is
cheap, but because it brings them
things they like.
I will give you an example.
Ikea’s return policy does not correspond
to a low cost company, because
it does not contribute to saving.
Having a policy like that you
have that you can return the product
is extreme.
In 365 days, even if you have used
it, you can change it for another.
If your policy is strictly low cost,
don’t allow yourself to do these
because it obviously doesn’t contribute.
Otherwise, if your primary goal
is to reduce costs, you would
have a return policy that would
have to be scratched legal or
strictly within the legal limit.
For example, Ikea catalogues provide
value to Ikea customers because
they can pick up ideas in their
homes, etc., choose the mobile phones
they will buy before going
to the point of sale.
This is clear that it does not
correspond to a strictly low
cost policy, because it spends a lot
of money on distributing millions
of catalogues around the world.
In addition, Ikea brings other differential
values, for example, design.
I think it’s the result of the
huge economics of scale, because
despite being the cost leader,
with that size you can afford
to hire designers, etc.
You can invest in product
design, but investing in design
is not a low-cost strategy.
A company that competes strictly
on low cost would have to invest
as little as possible.
Another factor that contributes
to people buying at Ikea,
not just by price, is the huge
range or variety of range.
This provides a lot of comfort
for customers.
A customer at Ikea, not only
furnish it, but buy everything
you need for a home.
This is clearly an added value
that Ikea is able to bring and
that makes its customers not
just buy it for price and
also be loyal.
Therefore, Ikea responds just
as it can be Toyota or Mercadona
or Zara, which we will analyze
in detail, responds to a generic
strategy that does not correspond
with cost leadership or differentiation
or said, but could be
considered best cost
strategy, the best
cost strategy.
They have relatively
low prices and costs compared to
the rest of the industry,
however, they are able to provide
differential values that
make their customers loyal.